= multi_db

=====-- This GEM was inspired by Rick Olson's "masochism"-Plugin

multi_db uses a connection proxy, which sends read queries to slave databases,
and all write queries to the master database (Read/Write Split).
Within transactions, while executing ActiveRecord Observers and
within "with_master" blocks (see below), even read queries are sent to the 
master database.

=== Important changes in 0.2.0

* As of this version, <tt>ActiveRecord::Base.connection</tt> does not return the
  connection proxy by default anymore (therefore the jump to 0.2.0). Only models
  inheriting from AR::B return the proxy, unless they are defined as master_models
  (see below). If you want to access the connection proxy from AR::B directly,
  use <tt>ActiveRecord::Base.connection_proxy</tt>.

* This version is the first attempt for thread-safety of this gem. <em>There might
  still be some threading issues left!</em>. So please test your apps thoroughly
  and report any issues you might encounter.

* <tt>CGI::Session::ActiveRecordStore::Session</tt> is now automatically registered
  as a master model.

=== Caveats

* works only with activerecord 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3

=== Install

  gem sources --add http://gems.github.com # only if you haven't already added github
  gem install schoefmax-multi_db

When using Rails, add this to your environment.rb:

  config.gem 'schoefmax-multi_db', :lib => 'multi_db', :source => 'http://gems.github.com'

=== Setup

In your database.yml, add sections for the slaves, e.g.:

  production: # that would be the master
    adapter: mysql
    database: myapp_production
    username: root
    password: 
    host: localhost

  production_slave_database: # that would be a slave 
    adapter: mysql
    database: myapp_production
    username: root
    password: 
    host: 10.0.0.2

  production_slave_database_2: # another slave
    ...
  production_slave_database_in_india: # yet another one
    ...

*NOTE*: multi_db identifies slave databases by looking for entries of the form
"<tt><environment>_slave_database<_optional_name></tt>". As a (useless) side effect you
get abstract classes named <tt>MultiDb::SlaveDatabaseInIndia</tt> etc.
The advantage of specifying the slaves explicitly, instead of the master, is that
you can use the same configuration file for scripts that don't use multi_db.
Also, when you decide to disable multi_db for some reason, you don't have to 
swap hosts in your <tt>database.yml</tt> from master to slave (which is easy to forget...).

To enable the proxy globally, add this to your environment.rb, or some file in
config/initializers:

  MultiDb::ConnectionProxy.setup!

If you only want to enable it for specific environments, add this to 
the corresponding file in config/environments:

  config.after_initialize do
    MultiDb::ConnectionProxy.setup!
  end

In the development and test environments, you can use identical configurations
for master and slave connections. This can help you finding (some of the) issues
your application might have with a replicated database setup without actually having
one on your development machine.

=== Using with Phusion Passenger

With Passengers smart spawning method, child processes forked by the ApplicationSpawner
won't have the connection proxy set up properly.

To make it work, add this to your <tt>environment.rb</tt> or an initializer script
(e.g. <tt>config/initializers/connection_proxy.rb</tt>):

  if defined?(PhusionPassenger)
    PhusionPassenger.on_event(:starting_worker_process) do |forked|
      if forked
        # ... set MultiDb configuration options, if any ...
        MultiDb::ConnectionProxy.setup!
      end
    end
  else # not using passenger (e.g. development/testing)
    # ... set MultiDb configuration options, if any ...
    MultiDb::ConnectionProxy.setup!
  end

Thanks to Nathan Esquenazi for testing this.

=== Forcing the master for certain actions

Just add this to your controller:

  around_filter(:only => :foo_action) { |c,a| ActiveRecord::Base.connection_proxy.with_master { a.call } }

=== Forcing the master for certain models

In your environment.rb or an initializer, add this *before* the call to <tt>setup!</tt>:

  MultiDb::ConnectionProxy.master_models = ['CGI::Session::ActiveRecordStore::Session', 'PaymentTransaction', ...]
  MultiDb::ConnectionProxy.setup!

*NOTE*: You cannot safely add more master_models after calling <tt>setup!</tt>.

=== Making one slave database sticky during a request

This can be useful to leverage database level query caching as all queries will
be sent to the same slave database during one web request.

To enable, add this to your environment.rb just before <tt>MultiDb::ConnectionProxy.setup!</tt>:

   MultiDb::ConnectionProxy.sticky_slave = true

And add this to your ApplicationController:

   after_filter { ActiveRecord::Base.connection_proxy.next_reader! }

*NOTE*: It's not possible to toggle this mode in a running process, as the dynamically
generated methods will have the initially defined "stickyness" built in.

=== Usage outside of Rails

You can use multi_db together with other framworks or in standalone scripts.
Example:

 require 'rubygems'
 require 'active_record'
 require 'multi_db'

 ActiveRecord::Base.logger = Logger.new(STDOUT)
 ActiveRecord::Base.configurations = {
   'development' => {
     'adapter'  => 'mysql',
     'host'     => 'localhost',
     'username' => 'root',
     'database' => 'multi_db_test'
   },
   'development_slave_database' => {
     'adapter'  => 'mysql',
     'host'     => 'localhost',
     'username' => 'root',
     'database' => 'multi_db_test'
   }
 }
 ActiveRecord::Base.establish_connection :development
 MultiDb::ConnectionProxy.setup!

 class MyModel < ActiveRecord::Base
   # ...
 end

 # ...

Note that the configurations hash should contain strings as keys instead of symbols.

=== Differences to "masochism":

* Supports multiple slave databases (round robin)
* It sends everything except "select ..." queries to the master, instead of
  sending only specific things to the master and anything "else" to the slave.
  This avoids accidential writes to the master when there are API changes in
  ActiveRecord which haven't been picked up by multi_db yet.
  Note that this behaviour will also always send helper methods like "+quote+" or
  "<tt>add_limit!</tt>" to the master connection object, which doesn't add any
  more load on the master, as these methods don't communicate with the db server
  itself.
* It uses its own query cache as the slave's cache isn't emptied when there are
  changes on the master
* It supports immediate failover for slave connections
* It will wait some time before trying to query a failed slave database again
* It supports nesting "with_master"-blocks, without unexpectedly switching you
  back to the slave again
* It schedules a reconnect of the master connection if statements fail there.
  This might help with HA setups using virtual IPs (a test setup would be nice
  to verify this)
* You specify slave databases in the configuration instead of specifying an extra
  master database. This makes disabling or removing multi_db less dangerous
  (Update: Recent versions of masochism support this, too).
* There are no <tt>set_to_master!</tt> and <tt>set_to_slave!</tt> methods, just
  <tt>with_master(&block)</tt>
* All proxied methods are dynamically generated for better performance

=== See also

==== Masochism

The original plugin:

* http://github.com/technoweenie/masochism

==== DataFabric

A solution by FiveRuns, also based on masochism but without the "nested with_master"-issue,
threadsafe and allows sharding of data.

* http://github.com/fiveruns/data_fabric

=== Contributors

* Matt Conway http://github.com/wr0ngway
* Matthias Marshall http://github.com/webops

=== Ideas

See: http://github.com/schoefmax/multi_db/wikis/home

=== Running specs

If you haven't already, install the rspec gem, then create an empty database
called "multi_db_test" (you might want to tweak the spec/config/database.yml).
From the plugin directory, run:

  spec spec


Copyright (c) 2008, Max Schoefmann <max (a) pragmatic-it de>
Released under the MIT license
